

  I. AT THE SIGN OF THE SUN IN KETTLEY                          25

  II. IN THE FEN                                                36

  III. THE FEN FERRY                                            44

  IV. A GREENWOOD COMPANY                                       54

  V. “BLOODY AS THE HUNTER”                                     64

  VI. TO THE DAY’S END                                          75

  VII. THE HOODED FACE                                          84


  BOOK II

  THE MOAT HOUSE

  I. DICK ASKS QUESTIONS                                        97

  II. THE TWO OATHS                                            108

  III. THE ROOM OVER THE CHAPEL                                118

  IV. THE PASSAGE                                              127

  V. HOW DICK CHANGED SIDES                                    133


  BOOK III

  MY LORD FOXHAM

  I. THE HOUSE BY THE SHORE                                    147

  II. A SKIRMISH IN THE DARK                                   156

  III. ST. BRIDE’S CROSS                                       164

  IV. THE “GOOD HOPE”                                          169

  V. THE “GOOD HOPE” (_Continued_)                             180

  VI. THE “GOOD HOPE” (_Concluded_)                            188


  BOOK IV

  THE DISGUISE

  I. THE DEN                                                   197

  II. “IN MINE ENEMIES’ HOUSE”                                 206

  III. THE DEAD SPY                                            218

  IV. IN THE ABBEY CHURCH                                      228

  V. EARL RISINGHAM                                            240

  VI. ARBLASTER AGAIN                                          245


  BOOK V

  CROOKBACK

  I. THE SHRILL TRUMPET                                        261

  II. THE BATTLE OF SHOREBY                                    270

  III. THE BATTLE OF SHOREBY (_Concluded_)                     279

  IV. THE SACK OF SHOREBY                                      285

  V. NIGHT IN THE WOODS: ALICIA RISINGHAM                      298

  VI. NIGHT IN THE WOODS (_Concluded_): DICK AND JOAN          308

  VII. DICK’S REVENGE                                          320

  VIII. CONCLUSION                                             325




  ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                       FACING PAGE

  “Now, mark me, mine host,” Sir Daniel said, “follow but mine
  orders and I shall be your good lord ever”                    26

  In the fork, like a mastheaded seaman, there stood a man in a
  green tabard, spying far and wide                             56

  Lastly, a little before dawn, a spearman had come staggering to
  the moat side, pierced by arrows                              98

  “We must be in the dungeons,” Dick remarked                  128

  The little cockle dipped into the swell and staggered under
  every gust of wind                                           174

  And Lawless, keeping half a step in front of his companion and
  holding his head forward like a hunting-dog upon the scent, ...
  studied out their path                                       198

  First came the bride, a sorry sight, as pale as the winter,
  clinging to Sir Daniel’s arm                                 234

  There were seven or eight assailants, and but one to keep head
  against them                                                 262

  “But be at rest; the Black Arrow flieth nevermore”           324




PROLOGUE




PROLOGUE

JOHN AMEND-ALL


On a certain afternoon, in the late springtime, the bell upon Tunstall
Moat House was heard ringing at an unaccustomed hour. Far and near, in
the forest and in the fields along the river, people began to desert
their labours and hurry towards the sound; and in Tunstall hamlet a
group of poor countryfolk stood wondering at the summons.

Tunstall hamlet at that period, in the reign of old King Henry VI., wore
much the same appearance as it wears to-day. A score or so of houses,
heavily framed with oak, stood scattered in a long green valley
ascending from the river. At the foot, the road crossed a bridge, and
mounting on the other side, disappeared into the fringes of the forest
on its way to the Moat House, and further forth to Holywood Abbey.
Half-way up the village, the church stood among yews. On every side the
slopes were crowned and the view bounded by the green elms and greening
oak-trees of the forest.

Hard by the bridge, there was a stone cross upon a knoll, and here the
group had collected--half-a-dozen women and one tall fellow in a russet
smock--discussing what the bell betided. An express had gone through the
hamlet half an hour before, and drunk a pot of ale in the saddle, not
daring to dismount for the hurry of his errand; but he had been ignorant
himself of what was forward, and only bore sealed letters from Sir
Daniel Brackley to Sir Oliver Oates, the parson, who kept the Moat House
in the master’s absence.

But now there was the noise of a horse; and soon, out of the edge of the
wood and over the echoing bridge, there rode up young Master Richard
Shelton, Sir Daniel’s ward. He, at the least, would know, and they
hailed him and begged him to explain. He drew bridle willingly enough--a
young fellow not yet eighteen, sun-browned and grey-eyed, in a jacket of
deer’s leather, with a black velvet collar, a green hood upon his head,
and a steel cross-bow at his back. The express, it appeared, had brought
great news. A battle was impending. Sir Daniel had sent for every man
that could draw a bow or carry a bill to go post-haste to Kettley, under
pain of his severe displeasure; but for whom they were to fight, or of
where the battle was expected, Dick knew nothing. Sir Oliver would come
shortly himself, and Bennet Hatch was arming at that moment, for he it
was who should lead the party.

“It is the ruin of this kind land,” a woman said. “If the barons live at
war, ploughfolk must eat roots.”

“Nay,” said Dick, “every man that follows shall have sixpence a day, and
archers twelve.”

“If they live,” returned the woman, “that may very well be; but how if
they die, my master?”

“They cannot better die than for their natural lord,” said Dick.

“No natural lord of mine,” said the man in the smock. “I followed the
Walsinghams; so we all did down Brierly way, till two years ago, come
Candlemas. And now I must side with Brackley! It was the law that did
it; call ye that natural? But now, what with Sir Daniel and what with
Sir Oliver--that knows more of law than honesty--I have no natural lord
but poor King Harry the Sixt, God bless him!--the poor innocent that
cannot tell his right hand from his left.”

“Ye speak with an ill tongue, friend,” answered Dick, “to miscall your
good master and my lord the king in the same libel. But King
Harry--praised be the saints!--has come again into his right mind, and
will have all things peaceably ordained. And as for Sir Daniel, y’are
very brave behind his back. But I will be no tale-bearer; and let that
suffice.”

“I say no harm of you, Master Richard,” returned the peasant. “Y’are a
lad; but when ye come to a man’s inches, ye will find ye have an empty
pocket. I say no more: the saints help Sir Daniel’s neighbours, and the
Blessed Maid protect his wards!”

“Clipsby,” said Richard, “you speak what I cannot hear with honour. Sir
Daniel is my good master, and my guardian.”

“Come, now, will ye read me a riddle?” returned Clipsby. “On whose side
is Sir Daniel?”

“I know not,” said Dick, colouring a little; for his guardian had
changed sides continually in the troubles of that period, and every
change had brought him some increase of fortune.

“Ay,” returned Clipsby, “you, nor no man. For, indeed, he is one that
goes to bed Lancaster and gets up York.”

Just then the bridge rang under horse-shoe iron, and the party turned
and saw Bennet Hatch come galloping--a brown-faced, grizzled fellow,
heavy of hand and grim of mien, armed with sword and spear, a steel
salet on his head, a leather jack upon his body. He was a great man in
these parts; Sir Daniel’s right hand in peace and war, and at that time,
by his master’s interest, bailiff of the hundred.

“Clipsby,” he shouted, “off to the Moat House, and send all other
laggards the same gate. Bowyer will give you jack and salet. We must
ride before curfew. Look to it: he that is last at the lych-gate Sir
Daniel shall reward. Look to it right well! I know you for a man of
naught. Nance,” he added, to one of the women, “is old Appleyard up
town?”

“I’ll warrant you,” replied the woman. “In his field, for sure.”

So the group dispersed, and while Clipsby walked leisurely over the
bridge, Bennet and young Shelton rode up the road together, through the
village and past the church.

“Ye will see the old shrew,” said Bennet. “He will waste more time
grumbling and prating of Harry the Fift than would serve a man to shoe a
horse. And all because he has been to the French wars!”

The house to which they were bound was the last in the village, standing
alone among lilacs; and beyond it, on three sides, there was open meadow
rising towards the borders of the wood.

Hatch dismounted, threw his rein over the fence, and walked down the
field, Dick keeping close at his elbow, to where the old soldier was
digging, knee-deep in his cabbages, and now and again, in a cracked
voice, singing a snatch of song. He was all dressed in leather, only his
hood and tippet were of black frieze, and tied with scarlet; his face
was like a walnut-shell, both for colour and wrinkles; but his old grey
eye was still clear enough, and his sight unabated. Perhaps he was deaf;
perhaps he thought it unworthy of an old archer of Agincourt to pay any
heed to such disturbances; but neither the surly notes of the alarm
bell, nor the near approach of Bennet and the lad, appeared at all to
move him; and he continued obstinately digging, and piped up, very thin
and shaky:

    “Now, dear lady, if thy will be,
     I pray you that you will rue on me.”

“Nick Appleyard,” said Hatch, “Sir Oliver commends him to you, and bids
that ye shall come within this hour to the Moat House, there to take
command.”

The old fellow looked up.

“Save you, my masters!” he said, grinning. “And where goeth Master
Hatch?”

“Master Hatch is off to Kettley, with every man that we can horse,”
returned Bennet. “There is a fight toward, it seems, and my lord stays a
reinforcement.”

“Ay, verily,” returned Appleyard. “And what will ye leave me to garrison
withal?”

“I leave you six good men, and Sir Oliver to boot,” answered Hatch.

“It’ll not hold the place,” said Appleyard; “the number sufficeth not.
It would take two-score to make it good.”

“Why, it’s for that we came to you, old shrew!” replied the other. “Who
else is there but you that could do aught in such a house with such a
garrison?”

“Ay! when the pinch comes, ye remember the old shoe,” returned Nick.
“There is not a man of you can back a horse or hold a bill; and as for
archery--St. Michael! if old Harry the Fift were back again, he would
stand and let ye shoot at him for a farthen a shoot!”

“Nay, Nick, there’s some can draw a good bow yet,” said Bennet.

“Draw a good bow!” cried Appleyard. “Yes! But who’ll shoot me a good
shoot? It’s there the eye comes in, and the head between your shoulders.
Now, what might you call a long shoot, Bennet Hatch?”

“Well,” said Bennet, looking about him, “it would be a long shoot from
here into the forest.”

“Ay, it would be a longish shoot,” said the old fellow, turning to look
over his shoulder; and then he put up his hand over his eyes, and stood
staring.

“Why, what are you looking at?” asked Bennet, with a chuckle. “Do you
see Harry the Fift?”

The veteran continued looking up the hill in silence. The sun shone
broadly over the shelving meadows; a few white sheep wandered browsing;
all was still but the distant jangle of the bell.

“What is it, Appleyard?” asked Dick.

“Why, the birds,” said Appleyard.

And, sure enough, over the top of the forest, where it ran down in a
tongue among the meadows, and ended in a pair of goodly green elms,
about a bowshot from the field where they were standing, a flight of
birds was skimming to and fro, in evident disorder.

“What of the birds?” said Bennet.

“Ay!” returned Appleyard, “y’are a wise man to go to war, Master Bennet.
Birds are a good sentry; in forest places they be the first line of
battle. Look you, now, if we lay here in camp, there might be archers
skulking down to get the wind of us; and here would you be, none the
wiser!”

“Why, old shrew,” said Hatch, “there be no men nearer us than Sir
Daniel’s, at Kettley; y’are as safe as in London Tower; and ye raise
scares upon a man for a few chaffinches and sparrows!”

“Hear him!” grinned Appleyard. “How many a rogue would give his two crop
ears to have a shoot at either of us? St. Michael, man! they hate us
like two polecats!”

“Well, sooth it is, they hate Sir Daniel,” answered Hatch, a little
sobered.

“Ay, they hate Sir Daniel, and they hate every man that serves with
him,” said Appleyard; “and in the first order of hating, they hate
Bennet Hatch and old Nicholas the bow-man. See ye here: if there was a
stout fellow yonder in the wood-edge, and you and I stood fair for
him--as, by St. George, we stand!--which, think ye, would he choose?”

“You, for a good wager,” answered Hatch.

“My surcoat to a leather belt, it would be you!” cried the old archer.
“Ye burned Grimstone, Bennet--they’ll ne’er forgive you that, my
master. And as for me, I’ll soon be in a good place, God grant, and out
of bow-shoot--ay, and cannon-shoot--of all their malices. I am an old
man, and draw fast to homeward, where the bed is ready. But for you,
Bennet, y’are to remain behind here at your own peril, and if ye come to
my years unhanged, the old true-blue English spirit will be dead.”

“Y’are the shrewishest old dolt in Tunstall Forest,” returned Hatch,
visibly ruffled by these threats. “Get ye to your arms before Sir Oliver
come, and leave prating for one good while. An’ ye had talked so much
with Harry the Fift, his ears would ha’ been richer than his pocket.”

An arrow sang in the air, like a huge hornet; it struck old Appleyard
between the shoulder-blades, and pierced him clean through, and he fell
forward on his face among the cabbages. Hatch, with a broken cry, leapt
into the air; then, stooping double, he ran for the cover of the house.
And in the meanwhile Dick Shelton had dropped behind a lilac, and had
his cross-bow bent and shouldered, covering the point of the forest.

Not a leaf stirred. The sheep were patiently browsing; the birds had
settled. But there lay the old man, with a cloth-yard arrow standing in
his back; and there were Hatch holding to the gable, and Dick crouching
and ready behind the lilac bush.

“D’ye see aught?” cried Hatch.

“Not a twig stirs,” said Dick.

“I think shame to leave him lying,” said Bennet, coming forward once
more with hesitating steps and a very pale countenance. “Keep a good
eye on the wood, Master Shelton--keep a clear eye on the wood. The
saints assoil us! here was a good shoot!”

Bennet raised the old archer on his knee. He was not yet dead; his face
worked, and his eyes shut and opened like machinery, and he had a most
horrible, ugly look of one in pain.

“Can ye hear, old Nick?” asked Hatch. “Have ye a last wish before ye
wend, old brother?”

“Pluck out the shaft, and let me pass, a’ Mary’s name!” gasped
Appleyard. “I be done with Old England. Pluck it out!”

“Master Dick,” said Bennet, “come hither, and pull me a good pull upon
the arrow. He would fain pass, the poor sinner.”

Dick laid down his cross-bow, and pulling hard upon the arrow, drew it
forth. A gush of blood followed; the old archer scrambled half upon his
feet, called once upon the name of God, and then fell dead. Hatch, upon
his knees among the cabbages, prayed fervently for the welfare of the
passing spirit. But even as he prayed, it was plain that his mind was
still divided, and he kept ever an eye upon the corner of the wood from
which the shot had come. When he had done, he got to his feet again,
drew off one of his mailed gauntlets, and wiped his pale face, which was
all wet with terror.

“Ay,” he said, “it’ll be my turn next.”

“Who hath done this, Bennet?” Richard asked, still holding the arrow in
his hand.

“Nay, the saints know,” said Hatch. “Here are a good two-score Christian
souls that we have hunted out of house and holding, he and I. He has
paid his shot, poor shrew, nor will it be long, mayhap, ere I pay mine.
Sir Daniel driveth overhard.”

“This is a strange shaft,” said the lad, looking at the arrow in his
hand.

“Ay, by my faith!” cried Bennet. “Black, and black-feathered. Here is an
ill-favoured shaft, by my sooth! for black, they say, bodes burial. And
here be words written. Wipe the blood away. What read ye?”

“‘_Appulyaird fro Jon Amend-All,_’” read Shelton. “What should this
betoken?”

“Nay, I like it not,” returned the retainer, shaking his head. “John
Amend-All! Here is a rogue’s name for those that be up in the world! But
why stand we here to make a mark? Take him by the knees, good Master
Shelton, while I lift him by the shoulders, and let us lay him in his
house. This will be a rare shog to poor Sir Oliver; he will turn paper
colour; he will pray like a windmill.”

They took up the old archer, and carried him between them into his
house, where he had dwelt alone. And there they laid him on the floor,
out of regard for the mattress and sought, as best they might, to
straighten and compose his limbs.

Appleyard’s house was clean and bare. There was a bed, with a blue
cover, a cupboard, a great chest, a pair of joint-stools, a hinged table
in the chimney-corner, and hung upon the wall the old soldier’s armoury
of bows and defensive armour. Hatch began to look about him curiously.

“Nick had money,” he said. “He may have had three-score pounds put by. I
would I could light upon’t! When ye lose an old friend, Master Richard,
the best consolation is to heir him. See, now, this chest. I would go a
mighty wager there is a bushel of gold therein. He had a strong hand to
get, and a hard hand to keep withal, had Appleyard the archer. Now may
God rest his spirit! Near eighty year he was afoot and about, and ever
getting; but now he’s on the broad of his back, poor shrew, and no more
lacketh; and if his chattels came to a good friend, he would be merrier,
methinks, in heaven.”

“Come, Hatch,” said Dick, “respect his stone-blind eyes. Would ye rob
the man before his body? Nay, he would walk!”

Hatch made several signs of the cross; but by this time his natural
complexion had returned, and he was not easily to be dashed from any
purpose. It would have gone hard with the chest had not the gate
sounded, and presently after the door of the house opened and admitted a
tall, portly, ruddy, black-eyed man of near fifty, in a surplice and
black robe.

“Appleyard--” the newcomer was saying, as he entered; but he stopped
dead. “Ave Maria!” he cried. “Saints be our shield! What cheer is this?”

“Cold cheer with Appleyard, sir parson,” answered Hatch, with perfect
cheerfulness. “Shot at his own door, and alighteth even now at purgatory
gates. Ay! there, if tales be true, he shall lack neither coal nor
candle.”

Sir Oliver groped his way to a joint-stool, and sat down upon it, sick
and white.

“This is a judgment! O, a great stroke!” he sobbed, and rattled off a
leash of prayers.

Hatch meanwhile reverently doffed his salet and knelt down.

“Ay, Bennet,” said the priest, somewhat recovering, “and what may this
be? What enemy hath done this?”

“Here, Sir Oliver, is the arrow. See, it is written upon with words,”
said Dick.

“Nay,” cried the priest, “this is a foul hearing! John Amend-All! A
right Lollardy word. And black of hue, as for an omen! Sirs, this knave
arrow likes me not. But it importeth rather to take counsel. Who should
this be? Bethink you, Bennet. Of so many black ill-willers, which should
he be that doth so hardily outface us? Simnel? I do much question it.
The Walsinghams? Nay, they are not yet so broken; they still think to
have the law over us, when times change. There was Simon Malmesbury,
too. How think ye, Bennet?”

“What think ye, sir,” returned Hatch, “of Ellis Duckworth?”

“Nay, Bennet, never. Nay, not he,” said the priest. “There cometh never
any rising, Bennet, from below--so all judicious chroniclers concord in
their opinion; but rebellion travelleth ever downward from above; and
when Dick, Tom, and Harry take them to their bills, look ever narrowly
to see what lord is profited thereby. Now, Sir Daniel, having once more
joined him to the Queen’s party, is in ill odour with the Yorkist
lords. Thence, Bennet, comes the blow--by what procuring, I yet seek;
but therein lies the nerve of this discomfiture.”

“An’t please you, Sir Oliver,” said Bennet, “the axles are so hot in
this country that I have long been smelling fire. So did this poor
sinner, Appleyard. And, by your leave, men’s spirits are so foully
inclined to all of us, that it needs neither York nor Lancaster to spur
them on. Hear my plain thoughts: You, that are a clerk, and Sir Daniel,
that sails on any wind, ye have taken many men’s goods, and beaten and
hanged not a few. Y’are called to count for this; in the end, I wot not
how, ye have ever the uppermost at law, and ye think all patched. But
give me leave, Sir Oliver: the man that ye have dispossessed and beaten
is but the angrier, and some day, when the black devil is by, he will up
with his bow and clout me a yard of arrow through your inwards.”

“Nay, Bennet, y’are in the wrong. Bennet, ye should be glad to be
corrected,” said Sir Oliver. “Y’are a prater, Bennet, a talker, a
babbler; your mouth is wider than your two ears. Mend it, Bennet, mend
it.”

“Nay, I say no more. Have it as ye list,” said the retainer.

The priest now rose from the stool, and from the writing-case that hung
about his neck took forth wax and a taper, and a flint and steel. With
these he sealed up the chest and the cupboard with Sir Daniel’s arms,
Hatch looking on disconsolate; and then the whole party proceeded,
somewhat timorously, to sally from the house and get to horse.

“’Tis time we were on the road, Sir Oliver,” said Hatch, as he held the
priest’s stirrup while he mounted.

“Ay; but, Bennet, things are changed,” returned the parson. “There is
now no Appleyard--rest his soul!--to keep the garrison. I shall keep
you, Bennet. I must have a good man to rest me on in this day of black
arrows. ‘The arrow that flieth by day,’ saith the evangel; I have no
mind of the context; nay, I am a sluggard priest, I am too deep in men’s
affairs. Well, let us ride forth, Master Hatch. The jackmen should be at
the church by now.”

So they rode forward down the road, with the wind after them, blowing
the tails of the parson’s cloak; and behind them, as they went, clouds
began to arise and blot out the sinking sun. They had passed three of
the scattered houses that make up Tunstall hamlet, when, coming to a
turn, they saw the church before them. Ten or a dozen houses clustered
immediately round it; but to the back the churchyard was next the
meadows. At the lych-gate, near a score of men were gathered, some in
the saddle, some standing by their horses’ heads. They were variously
armed and mounted; some with spears, some with bills, some with bows,
and some bestriding plough-horses, still splashed with the mire of the
furrow; for these were the very dregs of the country, and all the better
men and the fair equipments were already with Sir Daniel in the field.

“We have not done amiss, praised be the cross of Holywood! Sir Daniel
will be right well content,” observed the priest, inwardly numbering the
troop.

“Who goes? Stand! if ye be true!” shouted Bennet.

A man was seen slipping through the churchyard among the yews; and at
the sound of this summons he discarded all concealment, and fairly took
to his heels for the forest. The men at the gate, who had been hitherto
unaware of the stranger’s presence, woke and scattered. Those who had
dismounted began scrambling into the saddle; the rest rode in pursuit;
but they had to make the circuit of the consecrated ground, and it was
plain their quarry would escape them. Hatch, roaring an oath, put his
horse at the hedge, to head him off; but the beast refused, and sent his
rider sprawling in the dust. And though he was up again in a moment, and
had caught the bridle, the time had gone by, and the fugitive had gained
too great a lead for any hope of capture.

The wisest of all had been Dick Shelton. Instead of starting in a vain
pursuit, he had whipped his cross-bow from his back, bent it, and set a
quarrel to the string; and now, when the others had desisted, he turned
to Bennet and asked if he should shoot.

“Shoot! shoot!” cried the priest, with sanguinary violence.

“Cover him, Master Dick,” said Bennet. “Bring me him down like a ripe
apple.”

The fugitive was now within but a few leaps of safety; but this last
part of the meadow ran very steeply up-hill; and the man ran slower in
proportion. What with the greyness of the falling night, and the uneven
movements of the runner, it was no easy aim; and as Dick levelled his
bow, he felt a kind of pity, and a half desire that he might miss. The
quarrel sped.

The man stumbled and fell, and a great cheer arose from Hatch and the
pursuers. But they were counting their corn before the harvest. The man
fell lightly; he was lightly afoot again, turned and waved his cap in a
bravado, and was out of sight next moment in the margin of the wood.

“And the plague go with him!” cried Bennet. “He has thieves’ heels; he
can run, by St. Banbury! But you touched him, Master Shelton; he has
stolen your quarrel, may he never have good I grudge him less!”

“Nay, but what made he by the church?” asked Sir Oliver. “I am shrewdly
afeared there has been mischief here. Clipsby, good fellow, get ye down
from your horse, and search thoroughly among the yews.”

Clipsby was gone but a little while ere he returned, carrying a paper.

“This writing was pinned to the church door,” he said, handing it to the
parson. “I found naught else, sir parson.”

“Now, by the power of Mother Church,” cried Sir Oliver, “but this runs
hard on sacrilege! For the king’s good pleasure, or the lord of the
manor--well! But that every run-the-hedge in a green jerkin should
fasten papers to the chancel door--nay, it runs hard on sacrilege, hard;
and men have burned for matters of less weight. But what have we here?
The light falls apace. Good Master Richard, y’ have young eyes. Read me,
I pray, this libel.”

Dick Shelton took the paper in his hand and read it aloud. It contained
some lines of very rugged doggerel, hardly even rhyming, written in a
gross character, and most uncouthly spelt. With the spelling somewhat
bettered, this is how they ran:

    “I had four blak arrows under my belt,
     Four for the greefs that I have felt,
     Four for the nomber of ill menne
     That have opressid me now and then.

     One is gone; one is wele sped;
     Old Apulyaird is ded.

     One is for Maister Bennet Hatch,
     That burned Grimstone, walls and thatch.

     One for Sir Oliver Oates,
     That cut Sir Harry Shelton’s throat.

     Sir Daniel, ye shull have the fourt;
     We shall think it fair sport.

     Ye shull each have your own part,
     A blak arrow in each blak heart.
     Get ye to your knees for to pray:
     Ye are ded theeves, by yea and nay!

                                              “JON AMEND-ALL
                                                 of the Green Wood,
                                            And his jolly fellaweship.

    “Item, we have mo arrowes and goode hempen cord for otheres of your
     following.”

“Now, well-a-day for charity and the Christian graces!” cried Sir
Oliver, lamentably. “Sirs, this is an ill world, and groweth daily
worse. I will swear upon the cross of Holywood I am as innocent of that
good knight’s hurt, whether in act or purpose, as the babe
unchristened. Neither was his throat cut; for therein they are again in
error, as there still live credible witnesses to show.”

“It boots not, sir parson,” said Bennet. “Here is unseasonable talk.”

“Nay, Master Bennet, not so. Keep ye in your due place, good Bennet,”
answered the priest. “I shall make mine innocence appear. I will, upon
no consideration, lose my poor life in error. I take all men to witness
that I am clear of this matter. I was not even in the Moat House. I was
sent of an errand before nine upon the clock----”

“Sir Oliver,” said Hatch, interrupting, “since it please you not to stop
this sermon, I will take other means. Goffe, sound to horse.”

And while the tucket was sounding, Bennet moved close to the bewildered
parson, and whispered violently in his ear.

Dick Shelton saw the priest’s eye turned upon him for an instant in a
startled glance. He had some cause for thought; for this Sir Harry
Shelton was his own natural father. But he said never a word, and kept
his countenance unmoved.

Hatch and Sir Oliver discussed together for awhile their altered
situation; ten men, it was decided between them, should be reserved, not
only to garrison the Moat House, but to escort the priest across the
wood. In the meantime, as Bennet was to remain behind, the command of
the reinforcement was given to Master Shelton. Indeed, there was no
choice; the men were loutish fellows, dull and unskilled in war, while
Dick was not only popular, but resolute and grave beyond his age.
Although his youth had been spent in these rough, country places, the
lad had been well taught in letters by Sir Oliver, and Hatch himself had
shown him the management of arms and the first principles of command.
Bennet had always been kind and helpful; he was one of those who are
cruel as the grave to those they call their enemies, but ruggedly
faithful and well willing to their friends; and now, while Sir Oliver
entered the next house to write, in his swift, exquisite penmanship, a
memorandum of the last occurrences to his master, Sir Daniel Brackley,
Bennet came up to his pupil to wish him God-speed upon his enterprise.

“Ye must go the long way about, Master Shelton,” he said; “round by the
bridge, for your life! Keep a sure man fifty paces afore you, to draw
shots; and go softly till y’are past the wood. If the rogues fall upon
you, ride for’t; ye will do naught by standing. And keep ever forward,
Master Shelton; turn me not back again, an ye love your life; there is
no help in Tunstall, mind ye that. And now, since ye go to the great
wars about the king, and I continue to dwell here in extreme jeopardy of
my life, and the saints alone can certify if we shall meet again below,
I give you my last counsels now at your riding. Keep an eye on Sir
Daniel; he is unsure. Put not your trust in the jack-priest; he
intendeth not amiss, but doth the will of others; it is a hand-gun for
Sir Daniel! Get your good lordship where ye go; make you strong friends;
look to it. And think ever a paternoster while on Bennet Hatch. There
are worse rogues afoot than Bennet. So, God-speed!”

“And Heaven be with you, Bennet!” returned Dick. “Ye were a good friend
to meward, and so I shall say ever.”

“And, look ye, master,” added Hatch, with a certain embarrassment, “if
this Amend-All should get a shaft into me, ye might, mayhap, lay out a
gold mark or mayhap a pound for my poor soul; for it is like to go stiff
with me in purgatory.”

“Ye shall have your will of it, Bennet,” answered Dick. “But, what
cheer, man! we shall meet again, where ye shall have more need of ale
than masses.”

“The saints so grant it, Master Dick!” returned the other. “But here
comes Sir Oliver. An he were as quick with the long-bow as with the pen,
he would be a brave man-at-arms.”

Sir Oliver gave Dick a sealed packet, with this superscription: “To my
ryght worchypful master. Sir Daniel Brackley, knyght, be thys delyvered
in haste.”

And Dick, putting it in the bosom of his jacket, gave the word and set
forth westward up the village.




BOOK I

THE TWO LADS




